I'm a general practitioner,
what's here I think you call a family physician.
I work within the NHS,
I've been doing this work for about ten years.
If I could just pick up on a few
of Dr. Patrick's remarks
about the type of patients we see
and who may benefit from complementary therapies.
The most difficult part of my work
is dealing with people with chronic illnesses,
chronic distress whether it comes
from physical, psychological or social problems.
Those are the patients
that really pose the difficulties.
And those are the people that maybe
are going to benefit most
from non-drug approaches.
I've been interested in Sahaja Yoga
myself for about twenty years.
I'm mainly going to be talking about
the research being carried out into Sahaja Yoga.
But if you look through the literature
about yoga and meditation in general,
it's surprising how many illnesses,
how many different conditions you'll find
where there are published studies.
Just to run through a partial list,
there's hypertension, coronary artery disease,
heart failure, asthma, osteoarthritis,
diabetes, epilepsy, migraine,
anxiety, depression, stress,
chemical dependency
and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
In the US, you now have more patients
consulting complementary practitioners
than consulting conventional doctors,
and we're not far behind in Britain.
I myself have been interested
in Sahaja Yoga for twenty years
and there are quite a number of doctors
who have been practising for that length of time.
When I first came in, I was quite sceptical
about the benefits to health, to myself.
But what really intrigued me
were my own experiences.
If I could have the first slide, please?
This is a diagrammatic representation
of what we call the subtle system.
This is mainly what Shri Mataji
is going to talk about when she arrives.
So I won't discuss it in any detail,
but I myself have experiences
which relate to this system.
The other thing which struck me
and various colleagues
was how many people practising yoga
would come up to us without any prompting
and say that their health
had benefited in various ways.
So I decided to undertake
a questionnaire survey.
I distributed questionnaires
amongst the practitioners,
asking them to report whether
they felt their health had improved or not.
And these are the results.
Basically, those people with health index
4 or 5 reported their health had improved.
The message of this slide is that in general,
the longer people had been practising,
the more they felt
their health had improved.
The sorts of illnesses people described
were not major life-threatening conditions,
but things like chronic musculoskeletal problems,
asthma, minor psychological illnesses.
So that's the first study.
I'm now going to move on to talk about
some research carried out at
the University of New Delhi.
Over a number of years under the auspices
of Professor Rai,
who, as Dr. Katchek already mentioned,
was here two years ago and gave a lecture.
The first part of this research project
was to look at the physiological effects
of Sahaja Yoga meditation.
The message of this slide is that
as people meditate,
galvanic skin resistance increases.
And as people learn Sahaja Yoga
over the course of 16 weeks,
the baseline also increases.
Blood lactic acid concentrations decrease.
Urinary VMA decreases.
Systolic blood pressure decreases.
To summarise the physiology, we can say
it's all consistent with the reduction
in sympathetic nervous activity.
Other observations were an increase
in alpha activity on the EEG
and in a separate study at McMaster University,
it was shown that beta endorphins rise
whilst people are practising Sahaja Yoga.
Moving on now to a number of clinical studies.
First is hypertension.
This is a study in which 15 hypertensive patients
were followed up for 16 weeks.
The diastolic blood pressure fell
from an average of just over 109 to 86.
And the systolic blood pressure fell
from about 170 to 135.
This was despite a reduction in medication
amongst the Sahaja Yoga group.
So essentially, a group
of uncontrolled hypertensives
where their control was improved
and yet their medication was reduced.
In asthma, 9 patients again
followed up for 16 weeks.
This slide shows a significant improvement
in lung function
and there was also a reduction
in the number of acute asthma attacks.
Again, in most cases there was a reduction
in the medication taken.
The third study was on epilepsy.
10 patients followed up for 6 months.
Over that 6 months, the average frequency
of attacks was reduced from over 4
to less than 1 attack a month.
And 3 patients had stopped
having attacks altogether.
So those were all fairly small
and fairly short studies done in India.
They've all been replicated in Australia.
There's currently a research programme
underway at the University of New South Wales,
and they are moving on to do
larger and more rigorous studies.
So that is my presentation.
I'm going to ask Dr. Ashish Pradhan to come.
He is a clinical pharmacologist
currently working for Bristol
Myers Squibb in Montreal,
where he's the project manager
of health outcomes and economic evaluation.
So Dr. Pradhan.
---
A very succinct and brief presentation
regarding the studies conducted
so far in Sahaja Yoga.
What we are going to try to do
over the next 10 minutes or so
is to take a very quick overview
of the subtle system
to which he alluded,
and about which you shall
be hearing in further detail
from Shri Mataji herself.
As a background to what we are going to see
and what you are going to hear from her,
it would be useful to know
what the subtle system is about
and what kind of role it plays in our body.
And what kind of effect it would have
on the health outcomes
vis-à-vis the model of Sahaja Yoga.
We are also going to see very briefly
some epidemiological evidence
regarding some of the hypotheses.
What we can at the present moment regard
as hypotheses, regarding the aetiology
of certain things.
The causal relationship, as we would do
in more rigorously controlled studies,
is certainly an issue where you deal with
the whole paradigm of meditation
and its effects on health.
What we have tried to do here
is based on what Shri Mataji has been saying
for the past 30 years.
We have tried to get from the available
medical literature whatever
evidence may be available
to see if we can find evidence
that conforms to those hypotheses
that Shri Mataji has been talking about
for the past almost three decades.
So we shall come to that
in the latter half of the presentation.
This is the overview of the presentation.
We shall be taking a look
at the subtle system.
We shall be looking at what is the aetiology
of disease according to the model of Sahaja Yoga.
Then we shall be looking
at the epidemiological evidence
and we shall be concluding
with some key messages.
The subtle system is composed
of what are called in Sanskrit as nadis,
or channels of energy,
and they correspond basically
with the autonomic nervous system.
Then we have the centres
which are called as chakras
and they correspond
with the nervous plexuses.
Finally, we have within each one of us,
situated at the base of the spine,
the triangular bone, a residual dormant energy
which is called as the Kundalini energy.
So for the purposes of introduction,
these are the three most important components
that we have to bear in mind.
The nadis are predominantly three in number.
On the right side we have
what is called as the Ida Nadi,
and this side governs our emotions
and it corresponds to the right
sympathetic nervous system.
Then we have the Pingala Nadi
which corresponds to the right
sympathetic nervous system
and that part governs our actions.
And then finally we have
the Susumna Nadi
which corresponds to the parasympathetic
nervous system
and this governs our evolution.
The chakras are predominantly seven in number;
we shall quickly run through them.
At the bottom we have
what is called as the Mooladhara Chakra
which corresponds to the coccygeal plexus.
We have the Swadisthana Chakra
which corresponds with the aortic plexus.
We have the Manipura Chakra
which corresponds with the celiac plexus.
We have the Anahata Chakra
which corresponds with the cardiac plexus.
We have the Vishuddhi Chakra
which corresponds with the cervical plexus.
The Agnya which corresponds
with the optic chiasma
and the Sahasrara Chakra
which corresponds predominantly
with the limbic system.
The Kundalini is a dormant residual energy
and it is the instrument of our Self-realization
through its ascension
and establishment of union, or yoga.
Yoga, as Shri Mataji has said,
is basically the union.
So when the union takes place,
we say that the real yoga has occurred.
In other words, yoga in the classical sense
has got nothing to do with physical postures
or those kinds of calisthenics.
But it is an innate internal happening —
it is basically the occurrence of the union.
And the Kundalini energy is the instrument
through which this union can take place.
So what is Self-realization?
It is the upward ascent of the Kundalini energy
through the certain centres
and establishment of the union
through the All-pervading Divine Power.
It manifests — and this is extremely important —
it manifests as the flow of a cool breeze,
which in Sahaja Yoga we call vibrations,
from the palms of the hands
and from the top of the head.
Let us take a look at what is
the aetiology of disease in Sahaja Yoga.
But basically we have to define
what is a health state,
what is positive health
according to Sahaja Yoga.
It can simply be characterised
with three conditions:
no blockages on the chakras
or on those energy centres,
a harmonious and steady flow of the cool breeze
through the palms of your hands
and from the top of the head,
and a state of complete balance
within the subtle system.
When the internal system within us,
if all the elements within that system
are in perfect harmony, in perfect balance,
then we say that that is positive health.
So obviously disease would be
a disturbance in this state of balance.
Primarily, the cause of disease
according to Sahaja Yoga
is an imbalance in the subtle system,
secondary to blockages in the chakra.
This is a very simplistic mechanistic model
of understanding disease through Sahaja Yoga.
Now if we have to understand
what is the causal relationship
between imbalances
and disease manifestation,
we have to look at just some of the hypotheses
that Shri Mataji has been saying over the years.
We are going to examine just three
of those hypotheses
for which we have found
kind of evidence in the literature.
These are not studies
that Sahaja Yoga has conducted.
These are studies which are available
in the literature
and they were retrieved through the search
of medical databases like Medline.
So basically the first hypothesis
is excessive and inappropriate activity
of the right sympathetic nervous system,
your Pingala Nadi on the right-hand side,
leads to a direct effect
on the heart centre.
When we say excessive and inappropriate,
it means that if a person
is more likely by nature
to get angry pretty quickly,
or has increased hostility within him,
or has a kind of a domineering nature,
because the right side
governs our actions.
Yes, we need to perform our actions.
But actions have to be tempered with compassion,
with the right quantum of emotional input.
Otherwise, it tends to go
into a system of imbalance.
Due to the constraints of time
we cannot go into too many details,
but this is a simplistic notion
of what excessive right-side activity would mean
and its effect on the heart centre.
Bearing that in mind, the first study
was the ARIC study published by Williams et al
in Circulation just a couple of weeks ago.
The investigators were from Duke University
and from Johns Hopkins University.
The design was a prospective study
of 13,000 individuals over five years
for the association between anger trait
and the risk of cardiovascular events.
So called soft events were incidents of angina,
non-fatal myocardial infarction,
as compared to heart events
like acute MI and coronary heart disease.
Basically the patients filled out a questionnaire
identifying whether they had an anger trait,
whether they were more likely
to get angry relative to some other people.
This was part of the atherosclerosis risk
in community study done
all over the United States.
The results — if we look at the odds ratios
for high versus low anger —
it is 2.2 and the 95% confidence interval
ranges from 1.36 to 3.5,
which means if you are a person
who gets angry fast,
your chance of getting a fatal MI
or a cardiac event
is between 1 to 3 times
as compared to someone who
does not have that trait.
For heart events in fact it was 2.6
with a confidence interval of 1.4 to 4.9.
The second study was done in Portugal
by Coelho and colleagues
and was published in the Journal
of Cardiovascular Risk last year.
It was a case-controlled study
where cases of acute myocardial infarction
were compared to controls.
Cases of AMI versus controls,
type A behaviour was found
to be a significant predictor
of acute myocardial infarction,
and it was also found
that they had significantly
more depressive symptoms.
What this suggests is that within
a psychosocial construct of an individual
there was some kind of an imbalance,
and anger is an emotion predominantly
controlled by the Agnya Chakra
which, as we said in the hypothesis,
indirectly affects your heart.
Further evidence comes from this American study
published in the American Journal of Epidemiology.
It was a prospective cohort study,
2,200 men over a 9-year period.
The odds ratios: men with hostility scores
in the top quartile
had an all-cause mortality of 2.3
with a 95% interval of 1.4 to 3.5.
Cardiovascular mortality was 2.7
with a CI of 1 to 5.
The last study in this category
was published in Psychosomatic Medicine
by Gallagher and colleagues.
This was a random sample cohort study
and the predictive value of a low anger-out score
for ischaemic heart disease events was 1.7.
Again, it was a statistically significant outcome.
In this study patients had to fill in questions:
anger in, anger out, do I
express myself when angry.
So basically these studies show us
that out there in the world of epidemiology
we are beginning to find evidence
which might lend support to the thesis
that imbalance within us,
especially mediated through anger or hostility,
may have deleterious effects on cardiac events.
All these studies were done adjusting
for traditional cardiovascular risk factors
like smoking, hypertension,
obesity and diabetes.
So in a multiple regression model,
even if you adjust for those factors,
factors like anger and hostility
stand out as independent risk factors
for cardiovascular disease.
The second is anxiety or insecurity
predisposing women to an increased risk
of breast cancer.
Shri Mataji has been talking about this
for a number of years.
What we found in one study
published in the Journal of Cancer,
done in the United Kingdom
by Walter and Collins.
This was a randomised prospective study
of relaxation training
on response to primary chemotherapy.
This is not incidence of breast cancer.
These are breast cancer patients
who have been followed up
over a certain period of time.
The primary outcome variable is
whether or not they are
responding to breast cancer.
The results are quite fascinating.
The HADS score — the hospital anxiety
and depression score —
both depression and anxiety were significant
independent predictors of
response to chemotherapy.
Women who had very high scores
of anxiety and depression
had a higher likelihood of having recurrence,
or failing to respond adequately to chemotherapy.
The last hypothesis is
that, as Shri Mataji explains,
after marriage the husband and wife
complement each other's state of health.
So if the wife is having some kind of problems,
it does reflect in the husband's health
and vice versa.
One would say why do you need a study
to prove that?
But this study was carried out
at the University of Utah
under experimental conditions
by Brown et al.
It was a randomised controlled trial
of 45 married husbands
to assess whether the perception
of spousal dominance
can predict blood pressure reactivity.
The primary outcome was
systolic and diastolic blood pressure.
The results stated that subjects
interacting with the spouse perceived as dominant
were associated with having
a higher blood pressure.
So what are the key messages?
Psychosocial factors are emerging
as significant independent
risk factors of disease.
Sahaja Yoga presents an excellent model
for explaining the role of these risk factors
in terms of a possible aetiological role.
For example, when we say that there is
some kind of an internal imbalance.
Sahaja Yoga therefore affords
a critical alternative
for management of these diseases
through a simple and effortless programme
of correcting these internal imbalances.
How that happens is something
that you will find out
when Shri Mataji is here
and she will speak to you.
What we want to say is that there is this kind
of evidence out there,
and though we know that these relationships
might exist between these risk factors
and heart outcomes,
how do you cure?
There is no pill that's available,
there is no procedure you can undergo
in order to have an effect
on these kinds of outcomes.
It basically calls for setting right
your internal imbalances
and maintaining a state
of positive spiritual health,
which then has an absolutely salutary effect
on the physical health.
And this is where Sahaja Yoga can help.
Our next speaker is Dr. Brian Wells.
He is a consultant psychiatrist
who specialises in addictive medicine.
He is based in central London
and has an international private practice.
He has lectured at many international conferences.
Dr. Brian Wells, thank you.
---
Good evening, my name is Brian Wells
as Dr. Pradhan mentioned.
I would like to thank Dr. George Patrick
very much indeed
for allowing us the opportunity
to come here tonight,
and also to thank you all very much
for coming.
It's well past the working hours —
Dr. Spiro and I are operating on UK time
which is well past working hours.
Congratulations for coming.
I know that you are all
eagerly awaiting the arrival of Shri Mataji
and I can assure you,
you are not going to be
disappointed when she comes.
We have heard a fair bit about some
of the science around Sahaja Yoga
and some may be feeling
that this is still very rudimentary.
One of the reasons why we are eager
to present this evening
is because we want to demonstrate
via properly methodologically sound research
that the teachings of Shri Mataji
actually have a great deal to offer
and that they are based
on a scientific basis,
albeit presented in language
that some of us may not be familiar with.
Some of the words like Kundalini,
chakras, nadis, etc.
may not be familiar to all of us.
They certainly weren't familiar to me
as an allopathic trained doctor
who in the late 1970s
found himself having to become abstinent
from alcohol and drugs
and go to 12-step meetings.
I am sure you all know meetings
like Alcoholics Anonymous.
And eventually in 1980 I managed
to get clean, get sober, go to AA,
did my 90 meetings in 90 days in a row.
As you may know the 12-step fellowships
have a leaning towards spirituality.
They are not religious organisations.
There is quite a lot of talk
about a power greater than oneself.
As I was progressing through my own recovery
I found myself looking out for things
that made spirituality more meaningful.
I tried going back to religion,
I tried looking at different types of meditation,
some of which I was very attracted to
and some of which I wasn't.
Being someone interested in altered states
and chemical experiences,
what I needed was something
that was experiential.
I found if I sat in a lotus position,
for me, it didn't really do a whole lot.
I was somebody who needed
spectacular experiences.
And in 1982 I met an Indian doctor
who I was working with.
I sat down and had lunch with him
and asked him what he had been doing.
He said he had been travelling in India,
and he had met a meditation teacher.
When he touched her feet,
he was plunged into this state of oneness
and pure joy and pure knowledge.
He felt this cold wind rushing through him
and he was in a state of pure joy.
To an ex-drug using psychiatrist
looking for spiritual direction,
it sounded highly interesting.
I said, "Do you have to be Indian
in order to experience this?"
So you certainly had to be Indian
in order to understand the terms he was using,
like Kundalini and chakras.
I have to say that in my own quest
I wasn't really a hippie.
I never got to India.
I would run out of money by
the time I got to the airport.
I never quite did the Indian trip
which a lot of other people have done.
But I found myself interested.
I liked this guy.
He had something about him
that was appealing.
And I was certainly interested to try this out.
I was trying out all sorts of other things.
Why not this?
He arranged for a couple of people
to come round to the hospital where I was.
I had to be on duty that night.
They stood behind me.
They had a photograph of Shri Mataji
and lit a candle.
I looked at the photograph
and they stood behind me
and seemed to wave their arms around
and mutter things which I
now realise were Sanskrit.
And I sat there waiting to be plunged
into pure joy and knowledge
and oneness and ecstasy.
It didn't quite happen.
What I did feel was this cold experience
starting at the bottom of my legs,
working its way up my legs
and stopping at the base of my spine.
I was convinced that there was
a draft coming under the door.
They said, "No, this is the sort of thing
that people experience."
"People by and large do have some sort of
physical or physiological experience."
They then said,
"Well, it started if you just meditate,
just looking at the photograph,
using a candle and achieving
a state of thoughtlessness.
This will just happen for you.
You don't have to do anything."
They left me with the photograph
and with the candle.
I have to say I was a little disappointed.
I was hoping for a thunderbolt
to come through the window
and enlighten me
with oneness with God.
That hadn't happened.
But after they had gone,
I did know that something had happened.
It was something that was totally free.
Nobody had asked me for any money.
It was also something that I knew
in my heart was perfectly safe.
This was not going to harm me.
There was no question I had to wear funny clothes
or eat strange food
or do anything
that I felt uncomfortable with.
The people who had come around to see me,
they were working.
They'd come around after work.
One was a computer expert
and the other was his wife.
There was nothing odd about them.
They didn't have weird beads on or anything.
So I felt completely relaxed.
After they'd gone, I became aware
of this —
it was as though it was a bubble of air
that was following me around,
sitting on top of my head
and following me around wherever I was.
I was also aware that my visual perception
had changed slightly.
I remember looking at the on-call room I was in.
It had a white porcelain sink
with a bar of green soap.
It slightly stood out.
It was as though I'd taken
a small dose of mescaline.
I was aware that something odd,
but something very good, had happened.
And I was on call in this busy hospital.
I went to sleep and just slept.
My pager didn't go off.
I wasn't disturbed.
I woke up the next morning
and I felt very relaxed indeed.
The next day I had to run around London
doing all sorts of things.
What I found was really quite odd.
This may sound a little cosmic.
It may sound as though
I need a little anti-psychotic medication.
But this is what happened.
Whenever I drove anywhere,
the lights seemed to be green. I just flowed.
I had to go on the underground
in London.
I just seemed to walk in.
There wasn't a line to buy a ticket.
I'd buy the ticket.
The train would come in.
The doors were open.
I'd get on the train and go.
Instead of waiting in line
and fighting through London,
I seemed to be in touch
with some sort of synchronicity.
Things were just flowing and effortless.
I was very conscious that this was unusual.
It was a strange experience for me,
because I was used to having a hassle
and having to fight my way through London
to make things happen.
I think we'll just pause for one second
because Shri Mataji is here
and the stage is a bit dark
so she needs to lead the way over to the stage.
So, I'm just going to stop
and then when she's seated I'll carry on.
This cool business that was referred to
by the previous speakers,
it just seemed to flow
and it made me calm down.
It worked very well in conjunction
with my 12-step programme.
What I was impressed with
was that there was no money involved.
I didn't have to do anything strange.
I could carry on working as a doctor
in a busy Western city,
if I just practised this meditation
as was gently suggested to me,
and did little things to help myself,
such as put my feet in warm water in the evenings.
That felt pretty strange,
sitting with my feet in a
bucket of warm salted water.
But actually it made me feel a lot better.
For me, what I really liked about it
was that this was experiential.
It wasn't some academic process.
I didn't have to learn Sanskrit.
I didn't have to do anything other than just
experience what was being suggested.
And I gradually began to meet Shri Mataji
and go to meetings
where there were large numbers of people.
What really struck me about this
is that when there are large numbers of people
all actually utilising this energy,
the whole thing becomes a very powerful experience
because there are energies involved
that Shri Mataji will describe.
When there are groups of people doing it together
there is a collective accumulation of energy
and the whole thing
becomes extremely powerful.
So I went to a large meeting quite early on
and I came away after a couple of days
of meditation and dance programmes
and theatre and things that were put on.
It was very joyful.
It wasn't the sort of intense
"let's all sit down and meditate for 24 hours"
experiential stuff
that I had kind of ventured into previously.
It was all very joyful,
and the thing that struck me was that
Shri Mataji herself is full of joy.
She would be describing very complex processes
and there would be laughing and a joyfulness
and an innocence and an almost childlike state
that people seemed to be in,
as well as this extremely powerful experience
of the meditation.
And what that meant for me was,
when I sat down after one of these meetings,
I just wasn't thinking.
I felt totally calm, completely relaxed.
And when I did think,
every thought I had was spot on.
It was pure.
I knew it was accurate.
I knew exactly what was going on
with my patients
and I just had this confidence
that when I was feeling like this —
which wasn't the whole time;
it did involve doing some work
to achieve this state —
but when I was in that calm state,
I knew that every thought I was having
was some form of pure knowledge.
It was quite extraordinary.
This all happened to me about 18 years ago
and since then things have evolved.
I now use Sahaja Yoga
as part of my practice.
I work a lot with addicts and alcoholics.
We find an awful lot of people
get involved in Sahaja Yoga
and their desire to use drugs,
to smoke cigarettes, to drink alcohol
simply melts away.
We don't do intensive counselling.
We don't give them detoxes.
Some people need to go away and have detoxes,
and when they come back
they find that the state of well-being
and the flow of energy,
particularly when it's done collectively,
just seems to lead people
into a state of well-being
and leads them into a pathway
that seems to be in their own interest.
So I found that my career
has come together.
Life makes much more sense.
It absolutely complements
everything I was heading towards anyway.
It's helped with things like
one's value system.
One suddenly discovers that
driving around in fast cars
doesn't seem to matter quite so much
when this is there as a way
of spending one's evening.
So hassling around and wheeling and dealing
just didn't seem to make a whole lot of sense.
So for me, and for a lot of the patients
that I've treated subsequently,
I'm in no doubt that Sahaja Yoga
is based on a scientific basis
and it does need to be researched,
and we need a lot more data
than we're able to present tonight.
It's an experiential process.
It's not academic.
We actually feel physiological sensations.
We feel energy shifting around in our body,
and hopefully our technology will allow us
to experience some of that this evening.
Sahaja Yoga is a complete formula
both for prevention of illness,
for the diagnosis of illness
and for the treatment of illness.
It's also entirely free,
and there are other forms
of meditation that aren't.
There are other forms of meditation and healing
where people are making a lot of money
out of traditional spiritual techniques.
And for me, being free
and being something that wasn't forced on me,
being something that's natural,
gentle and joyful is important.
So ladies and gentlemen,
I now like to introduce
the teacher of Sahaja Yoga,
the founder of Sahaja Yoga,
the person who has evolved
and developed this form of meditation.
I know you're all very pleased to welcome
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
who is here with us tonight.
---
I bow to all the seekers of truth.
At the very outset, I would like to thank
the National Institute of Health
for inviting Me to speak to you people
about Sahaja Yoga.
Today, I'm going to tell you
the secrets of medicine.
So far whatever we have known
in the medical colleges,
there is something beyond it
which we should know
and utilise our knowledge for
a great deal of advantage.
'Sahaja': 'saha' means 'with'
and 'ja' is 'born'.
With you is born this right
to become Self-realized.
Yoga is the union
with the Divine Power.
We have heard about Divine Power
in all the books and scriptures,
but we have never experienced it.
We don't know if it really existed or not.
But the time has come
for us to experience that.
Also in the medical science we know quite
a lot about sympathetic nervous systems.
But we don't know much
about the parasympathetic and its control.
The secret I'm going to tell you is
how to control your parasympathetic system.
It controls and balances all the activity
of the sympathetic.
If I say there is a power placed
in our triangular bone,
which is called the sacrum,
you may doubt it.
But this triangular bone is called sacrum —
it's a sacred bone.
That means the Greeks knew about it,
that it's a sacred bone.
In this bone is placed, in three and a half coils,
that is also mathematical,
three and a half coils,
a power which is made of many threads,
and which is the one
we call for our ascent,
for our last breakthrough.
After human awareness, if we had achieved
everything in our evolution,
there would have been
not all these problems.
So many problems exist —
on individual level, on collective level.
Why these problems should be there
if we are really fully evolved?
But we are not.
There is something that has to be happening,
and for that our Creator Himself
has placed this power
in our triangular bone.
Now you need not take my talk as granted,
but you should experiment.
As honest people, you must experiment
and see for yourself
if there is this power or not,
if it works or not, does it ascend or not?
It's absolutely scientific.
Absolutely scientific.
And once you enter into that arena
of secret science,
then you'll be amazed
that there is so much to be known about ourselves.
All the scriptures have said
that you should know yourself.
For us, it is some separate subject,
not for doctors —
some sort of a religious subject
that we should know ourselves.
But now, we are going towards unity.
Unity as a human being,
unity as all the religions, all the world.
How do we do that?
Is there any way of connecting you
to that area of Divine Power
by which you all become one?
The new future medical science
has to understand what is parasympathetic,
what is this Kundalini I am talking about,
what is the function of this Kundalini,
how it works.
Now it is like a primule in a seed
which sprouts and then grows into a tree.
Firstly, whatever is your seeking —
if you have not known yourself,
seeking may go on and is going on
in this country like a mad race.
All your seeking must come to an end,
otherwise, it has no meaning.
Waste of life, waste of energy.
It's a very, very simple thing.
Within you lies this power,
whatever may be your colour,
whatever may be your nationality,
your religion or whatever,
as long as you are a human being,
this Kundalini is there,
quite ready to be ascending.
It ascends automatically,
just like a seed has a primule which ascends.
You don't do anything.
You don't have to stand on your head.
It is there.
'Sahaj' also means spontaneous.
It works out spontaneously.
You all have this power within you
and only thing you have to do
is experience this.
This rises, this power rises,
passes through six centres,
I think they have shown them here,
and pierces through your fontanel bone area,
which you know what it is, I need not tell you.
And then pierces through and becomes one
with this All-pervading Power.
As this instrument is connected,
you also get connected.
Without connection this has no meaning.
In the same way we do have no meaning,
we are going here, there, there, there.
But we are not yet knowing the truth,
and the truth is
that you are all going to be the Spirit.
Now here we come very close
to spirituality and to the eternal.
Not to be afraid of it.
It is a part of us.
Of course it is not mentioned
in anatomy or in any one of the books,
but it is a fact.
You have to see for yourself.
Don't deny because it was not in your books,
but try to see for yourself if it is so.
Because how beneficial it is.
First of all, all these centres
are responsible for your physical,
mental, emotional
and spiritual beings.
Then the right side is the knowledge
of the body and also the mental self,
which is also not good.
What you know is outside, superficial.
For that, what you have to do is first of all
get your Realisation.
That, at least, you should have.
Nothing happens to you and there is
nothing to be frightened about it.
There is nothing to doubt about it.
You all have to have your Self-realization —
that is the Self-knowledge.
Once you have your Self-knowledge,
you know all about your chakras.
On your fingertips you can feel
what's the problem with you,
what's the problem of another person.
For example, somebody has cancer.
Now they have to go through
such a lot of treatment.
But it's only on your fingertips you can say
what disease the person has.
On the fingertips.
Because you are entitled, you are empowered.
But first raise your powers
and become that —
and I'm talking about becoming
and nothing else.
Unless and until you become that,
you won't understand
what is the gift of the Divine to us.
Once this Kundalini rises,
she enlightens all the centres.
She integrates all the centres.
Apart from that,
she looks after all these centres.
For example, I will give you
a case of cancer.
Now what we know about cancer
is different doctors for different things.
But it's very simple.
You have the left side and right side
of the sympathetic nervous system.
Now I don't know in medicine
how far they have gone,
but when I studied,
they thought both are just the same.
They are not.
They are two different systems.
One works for the other,
but in a way it is the opposite.
So it's complementary.
I'll show you now.
Supposing in my hand — I'll show you.
This is one centre from the right side,
another centre from the left side,
and you put them together.
Now this is the spinal cord, say for example.
Now when you work very hard,
you are working your right sympathetic very much
and you are exhausting your energy
in the centre, whatever it is.
Suddenly your left side just breaks. Why?
Maybe some shock,
maybe some accident,
maybe something due to sickness.
It breaks.
It breaks means it has no connection
with the centre.
That means it is on its own.
That's how a malignant cell starts.
Very simple as that.
Now supposing by any chance
you could raise the Kundalini
and push it through both these ends,
then they can look after.
That's how cancer can be cured.
Of course, Sahaja Yoga has cured cancer.
All kinds of cancers it has cured.
But we don't want to become doctors, you see.
We don't want to do the doctor's job.
But we can tell you
how you can cure so many people.
So because in a short time
I can't tell you everything,
let me tell about one chakra.
It's the Swadisthana — they'll show you.
It's the second chakra in you.
A chakra is a centre — a subtle centre
which comes out of your third centre,
that we call as Nabhi chakra.
And it starts moving like a lotus all over.
This is the one which looks after
all the organs in the stomach.
This chakra is a subtle one.
Of course you may not see it in dissection,
but it is there.
Now when it starts moving like this,
what happens is that you get too much on one side.
Supposing you are working very hard,
then it has to work too hard
if you are thinking too much.
We never think how our brain is given energy,
from where does it get energy.
It is through this centre
that our brain gets the energy.
The grey cells get the energy
from this centre.
Now this centre is working very hard
when we start thinking too much.
People who think, think, think, think —
what happens is
this Swadisthana chakra becomes attentive
only to the brain.
But it also looks after your liver.
It looks after the pancreas.
It looks after your spleen, kidneys
and also the lower intestines.
That's the job
this one centre has to do.
Now when you think too much,
the first thing that can happen
is something goes wrong
with your liver.
The liver, as you know,
is to take out all the heat of the body
and deliver it into the circulation of blood.
Now if that heat accumulates
it cannot do it, because the liver is failing.
As a result this heat starts moving upward.
Now this is not in the medical books,
but I am just telling.
It starts moving upward.
According to us, there is a centre
we call the right heart —
a very important centre.
There are three hearts:
left heart, right heart, centre of the heart.
The right heart gets affected
and you can get asthma.
Asthma is absolutely curable,
100% curable.
No doubt, but you have to take to Sahaja Yoga.
That's all.
Then this heat moves from here
and goes to the heart.
When a boy is young,
twenty-one or twenty-two years of age,
he is playing tennis
and also drinking too much,
then what happens is his liver
goes out completely,
and maybe he gets such a massive heart attack
that it is fatal.
But this process goes on and sometimes
people get a massive heart attack later on.
So this is the heat process
which goes from here and moves to the pancreas.
You get the pancreas affected,
you get diabetes.
Diabetes is also curable.
Then it moves down to the kidneys
and the kidneys stop.
One chakra!
Then heat also, as I told,
goes to the spleen.
If the heat goes to the spleen,
only then you get what we call blood cancer.
I shouldn't say, but we have cured
many blood cancer patients.
Mostly architects and chartered accountants
get this blood cancer.
They are cured.
For the last ten years they are living well.
So it's a very fast happening.
I call it a 'jet Kundalini' in modern times.
And it really works.
It's surprising.
Now this happening of one centre is so important.
There are so many diseases which can be cured
if you can look after these centres.
Except for two.
One is AIDS.
Because they can be cured,
but they are extremely arrogant
and think they are doing a martyrdom.
How can you talk to them?
It's a big problem like that.
Then another is Alzheimer's.
That's another disease you cannot attend to.
Because this comes to people
who have been like Hitlers in their lifetime —
arrogant, very aggressive.
These people, when they get this disease,
become even worse.
They may even abuse you.
They can't get up and hit you,
but they will say everything
that upsets others.
So you give up your hopes about them.
Not that they cannot be cured,
but it's a little too much
to attend to them.
I tried with three people
then I gave it up.
When they started abusing Me
I was surprised they couldn't
receive any vibrations.
So I said, "This cannot work out".
So one has to be humble about it.
If you think you have known everything,
it won't work out.
Another thing, you have to be
extremely honest.
You have to be honest to yourself
and honest to the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga.
It's all for you, absolutely free.
It's the best that can happen.
Now I was told that in this institution
you have a lot of research happening.
I would love you people
to do this research on Sahaja Yoga.
All of you.
All the rest of the gimmicks people have done —
they were not at all scientific, in no way.
For this, you don't have to do much research,
because you raise the Kundalini
of one person and you will see the results.
It's a tremendous power within you.
But we don't know our value.
That's what they said:
"You should know your Self."
We don't know what we have,
what powers we have, what we can do.
Not through book knowledge,
but through the knowledge of the Divine.
So when we come to that,
we understand that spirituality and good health,
everything is to be proved.
So as a result,
what do you get?
On your fingertips, you can feel the centres.
Five, six and seven
on the left sympathetic.
on the right sympathetic.
You can feel it,
where is the problem.
Then no need to take tests —
on the fingertips you can see where the problem is
and what should be attended to.
It's a simple method of doing it.
Like so many people have suggested
and have written books
that if the Kundalini rises,
then this problem comes and that.
Nothing of the kind.
Last thirty years I have been doing this.
I have not seen one person anything
happening to him.
Never, never.
So it is for you just to see,
spend at the most one month.
And you will be amazed.
You will be masters.
Because it's your own power.
It is not somebody else's power.
It's your own power.
Only thing — you should have
the full knowledge about the
secret science of medicine.
Because with this we have therapy.
Medicine is for curing people and health.
Then this is the best, easiest way.
But that doesn't mean you discard.
Because you are much more knowledgeable about it,
you know what the problem is.
With the symptoms also you can say
and you can verify. Very easily.
Supposing you put your hands to something
and you feel that person is a psychological case.
You find out, you verify.
And psychological cases
are completely cured in Sahaja Yoga.
There is one patient here
who was with you.
Only, I think two years back I met him.
And today he is a cured man.
Psychology is very difficult,
I must say, I'm sorry.
But they think it's very hard to cure.
Also, medically affected people
can also be very cured.
First, you must become the masters.
You must have the whole powers within.
And then you work it out,
and you will be amazed
what powers you have,
how much you can do to help this world.
Apart from that, the best thing
that happens is a person
gets completely transformed.
I feel, I have written also in my book,
that in the genes we have a phosphorus.
And if a person is dry, less water,
this phosphorus explodes
and you get into tempers.
Getting into tempers is not your doing —
it's just this phosphorus working out the heat.
So you get your experience.
Then you get your peace.
How to get your peace?
It's very simple that our style is
we see anything, we react.
I see this top table, I react.
I see people, I react.
But with Kundalini rising, it stops.
How? Because a thought arises, falls down,
and a thought arises, falls down.
It's a continuous thing and we are mostly
jumping on the cusps of these thoughts.
Now when the Kundalini rises,
she elongates those thoughts.
There is a space in between —
it's called in Sanskrit, the 'villamba'.
We can call it pause.
And when your mind stops like that,
you become thoughtlessly aware.
You are thoughtless
but you are extremely aware,
and you reach the witness state.
You see everything as a witness.
Just as a witness.
Say for example, I see a beautiful carpet.
I am very much enamoured and I react:
"Oh my God, what a good carpet!
How much it must have cost?
Where can I get it?"
Supposing it's mine,
then I am too worried:
"I have not yet registered it
or insured it, so there is a problem."
But supposing I am a Realised soul,
then I just watch it.
I watch it silently and enjoy
all the art that is put into it.
That's how you learn how to enjoy art.
In Sahaja Yoga, I've known people
who were chartered accountants
who never knew anything
about music or poetry
and have become very great poets.
Somebody who never used to sing
has started singing.
So many things have happened.
Apart from that, anything —
I must tell in this country — that you prosper.
Because your awareness is so great
that you prosper.
All those Sahaja Yogis
who have come to Sahaja Yoga have prospered.
Not that you are hankering after money.
But money hankers after you.
Why? Because your attention is so deft,
your attention is so pure,
in the light of the Spirit,
your attention knows
what is destructive for you,
what is constructive for you.
For example, somebody gets the money
and goes on wasting on this and that,
getting all the bad qualities
that are not needed for body or mind.
But supposing he is a Realised soul,
he gets the money.
He says, "It's there for some good purpose."
And that's how he works it out.
So the prosperity comes, and the joy.
Joy is singular.
It is not happiness or unhappiness.
If you feel joyous, you feel so joyous
and happy and you don't hurt anybody.
You just enjoy your compassion,
your love, your confidence.
So this is what, when we were students,
we used to think:
for expression of our love,
we have become a doctor.
For our compassion,
But now the ideology has changed.
You enjoy your work.
I mean, I'm not paying any money
to these doctors,
neither are they trying
to get money from the patients.
But the enjoyment of curing is so great —
much greater than all the wealth of the world.
And that's how you get it.
But you don't become poor.
There are so many ways you are helped,
because this Divine Power is all-pervading.
That's how you understand
how to have your beautiful family,
how to have your beautiful
relationships with each other,
how to lead a very beautiful life
and make a beautiful country.
Such people are needed today.
Such happy, joyous, peaceful
and loving people we need.
And that you get —
for that you don't have to suffer in any way.
You don't have to suffer.
You enjoy.
For curing others, you don't suffer.
You really enjoy every bit of it.
So I wish you all the best of luck.
Please, if you want to have Self-realization,
we'll work it out today.
But that's not the end of it.
You have to attend our centres.
No money in it.
You can't pay any money.
This is one thing you should know.
In this country, they could not accept Me
because I was not taking any money.
Can you believe that?
They said, "You have no Rolls Royce?"
I said, "No. I have only one car, my husband has."
"You are in the business?"
"No, I'm not."
"Then we don't want you."
This attitude has to change.
What will you ask for?
For joy, for happiness,
for doing good to others.
And automatically your heart starts melting
and really you become a wonderful person.
Other problems also get solved.
Like, too much of right side —
because I'm saying, because you are doctors —
you people all develop right side more
than the left side.
Another thing which is very dangerous
that one can get into
is the same heat going into your head.
So you can get paraplegia.
It's common. It's very, very common.
But that's not necessary.
Now you know, I'm very old,
much older than all of you.
But one thing is there —
I'm very active and I never feel tired.
It's so enjoyable, the whole thing is,
to talk to people about it.
Moreover, it cannot be forced on you.
It cannot.
You have to ask.
Why? Because this Kundalini is the pure desire.
You know one thing —
that our desires are not satiable.
If they were pure,
there would have been no economics.
Because you want to have one thing,
all right, you get it.
Then you want to have another thing,
you get it. You are never satisfied.
So when this pure desire ascends,
you get the satisfaction.
And that is why you enjoy each and everything.
That's the temperament you should develop.
Beautiful.
Human beings are very beautiful.
I think they are a little bit lost
in the wilderness.
And they have to come back
to understanding of the truth.
Because you get the absolute truth.
Absolute truth.
If any person comes to Me,
I see into my hands.
I say, "Here it is."
You can verify the absolute truth.
Any person who comes and tries to cheat you
as a guru — you can easily find out
if they're true or not.
Any other thing, whatever you want to know,
it is absolute knowledge that you can get.
We call it 'Gyana' —
it means the power of knowledge
and the power of absolute knowledge.
On your nervous system you feel it.
It's very, very dynamic.
But you are dynamic.
It's still — it's a sleeping Kundalini.
Let it rise and you will see
how dynamic you are,
how much you are effective,
how much you can work it out.
Thank you very much again
and I would request people to understand
that I cannot force it on you.
It has to be of your desire.
And so, I would say,
if you don't want to have your Self-realization,
then go away.
But it's nothing —
it hardly takes ten
minutes for you to reach the heavens.
So why not try it?
---
I wonder if you could be specific
about what one would expect to see
if somebody sits.
Does one sit in that position?
Does one say a mantra?
Does one do physical movement?
Does one close one's eyes?
I have no idea what you are talking about.
That I will tell you, definitely.
But you don't have to stand on your head,
nothing of the kind.
All right? It's very simple.
Wherever you are sitting, it's all right.
Thank you for asking.
---
Mataji, what would be the effect
of diet and posture on meditation?
This you can find out.
Once you have your Realisation,
you will realize what sort
of a personality you are
and what sort of food you should have.
Once you get your Realisation,
you yourself will realize
what kind of food you should take
and what kind of posture you should do.
Certain schools say that the kind of diet
you take — say fruits and natural foods —
will provide an aid in meditating properly.
Things like meat or wine,
they say, will not work properly.
It's not like that.
It's a very analytical thing.
Say for example, I would say in general,
in India, people should eat meat
because they are so weak,
their muscles are so weak.
But say in the European countries,
they should eat less meat
because they are quite muscular,
I think sometimes.
But for a liver patient,
there is another kind of food.
You see, it depends on the personality.
All right?
---
My son is autistic
and he has a very low mental IQ.
So how can I treat him?
How can he do the yoga?
He can be cured.
Where is your meditation class
and how can we get there?
No, no, you have to come
and we will see.
We can try
and you don't have to pay anything.
You bring that son there,
your child, and you see for yourself.
---
She is talking about somebody
who is 29 years of age and he can't even sit.
So I said, "All right,
you get your Realisation.
You understand
and you can cure him."
Also, these people can go and do it.
She can do it herself.
We have no hospital here, nothing.
I wanted one of these doctors
to come and stay here
and tell you about Sahaja Yoga.
If somebody could be employed or something,
he could come here.
That was my suggestion.
---
This is about Sahaja Yoga.
So you are dealing with the Kundalini yoga here.
In India and everywhere.
It's not here only.
All right. That's the point for that.
You have to come to our centre.
We have got books.
I have written four books, I think.
And also we have written about medicine.
You can come and get it.
They will help you.
But you have to come there, you see?
Yes, I will come there.
But is there some flyer?
Can you let us know
where the yoga centres are here in Maryland?
That information will be conveyed
to you shortly.
They will do all that
and tell you where things are.
Now, most of them are anxious
to get their Self-realization.
So you get your Self-realization,
and then you go to the centre also.
All right? Thank you.
---
I have worked with the AIDS patients
that you mentioned
and they want to come back to the meetings
and they do the meditation themselves.
They have been treating themselves.
All these things you can ask
at the centre.
Why not ask there?
While people are waiting
to get their Self-realization.
So let's respect that.
We have to respect them,
respect ourselves also.
---
All right. Now everybody must sit down.
That's important.
You should be relaxed.
Please be seated.
You all should be relaxed.
Now one humble thing I have to ask
is to take out your shoes
because Mother Earth
will also help you.
Please put both your hands towards Me,
just like this.
Simple like this.
If they are on your lap,
it's also all right.
Whichever way you feel comfortable.
Now, at the very outset,
I have to ask you one thing —
that you should not feel guilty at all
for anything.
I'm catching this finger,
that means there are people
who are feeling guilty.
Whatever has happened in the past is past.
It's finished.
And the future doesn't exist.
You have to be in the present.
And so please, don't feel guilty.
If something has been done wrong,
all right, so what?
At this moment, at least,
you should not be guilty.
It's a wrong thing
to feel guilty and kill yourself.
I don't know why,
in the West they have done nothing wrong.
If they were guilty,
they would have been in jail.
It's a common fashion
to feel guilty also.
Indians will never feel guilty, somehow.
They don't know how to fight to feel guilty.
And then another thing is
that you have to forgive others.
Forgive others.
You may say, "Mother,
it's very difficult to forgive others."
You may say that.
But what I would say logically is,
whether you forgive or not forgive,
you are doing nothing.
By not forgiving,
only you torture yourself.
So forgive.
Forgive everyone and forgive yourself.
That's a very important thing
and it has such a tremendous power.
So I request you to forgive yourself
and forgive others.
That's all.
If you can do this, it will work out,
and I'm sure it will work out.
Now, how do you forgive?
Just to say, "Mother, I forgive everyone."
That's all.
"Mother, I forgive myself.
Mother, I forgive everyone."
You can say that.
It's very simple to say.
That's not a mantra or anything,
but it's a very big thing,
because it opens the centre here,
at the Agnya,
which is on the crossing
of the optic chiasma, which is very constricted.
And it opens like that.
So just say that,
because the Kundalini has to rise.
That's the main thing.
Now please put your right hand towards Me
and put down your head
and see for yourself if there's a cool breeze
coming out of your head.
Just see.
Cool or hot breeze coming out
of the fontanel bone area.
Just see for yourself.
You can put your hand up there,
or on the sides, forward, backward,
anywhere you feel like.
And see for yourself if there's a cool breeze
or hot breeze like vibrations coming out.
It is hot because you have not forgiven yourself
or you have not forgiven others.
This must be the reason.
But let feel that it's coming out of your head —
that is the biggest proof.
Now don't doubt it.
There's no air conditioning in your head
that it is coming out.
People start doubting like that.
So raise it a little bit.
Now raise it.
Not in front.
Take it on the fontanel bone area
which was the soft bone in our childhood.
Now please put the left hand towards Me,
and bend your head
and see, with the right hand now,
see for yourself
if there's a cool or a hot breeze
coming out of your head.
Have faith in yourself.
That's the main thing.
You all can get Realisation
and you can become Self-realised also,
just like Sufis.
Now put your right hand towards Me
and left hand again on the fontanel bone area.
You can move your hand
and see for yourself
if there's a cool or a hot breeze
coming out of your head.
Now after this, please put both your hands
towards Me like that, and don't think.
Just don't think.
Don't think. Just don't think.
Have your hands fully open like this
and don't think.
All those who have felt cool or hot breeze
on the fingertips, or on the palm,
or on top of your head,
out of the fontanel bone area,
please raise your hands.
Oh My God! Thank you very much.
So many of you, wow!
Now I have a very humble request —
that you must attend the courses in our centres.
Please attend our centre
and try to master this.
You can.
This power that is given you here
is coming out of your fontanel bone area,
and it is there.
It's so great and works in no time.
So I would request you to please go
to our centre and master it.
And you will see how many wonders you can do,
because you are so powerful.
Again I thank you very much,
all of you and your institute
which has been so kind to Me.
Thank you.